## What is the order of adnominal demonstrative and noun?

## Summary
GB025 is concerned with the order of the noun and adnominal demonstratives (i.e. demonstratives that modify the noun). This feature has also been split into two binary features, "GB025a Is the order of the adnominal demonstrative and noun Dem-N?" and "GB025b Is the order of the adnominal demonstrative and noun N-Dem?". It is possible to answer 1 or 0 for one of the binarised features, and "?" for the other.

For Gb065 there are three possible values to code: 1, before the noun, 2, after the noun, or 3, both orders are possible. Like all questions concerning the order of elements, only the pragmatically unmarked orders are targeted.

## Procedure
1. In the pragmatically unmarked order, if the demonstrative precedes the noun, code 1 for GB025 or GB025a 1.
2. In the pragmatically unmarked order, if the demonstrative follows the noun, code 2 for GB025 or GB25b 1.
3. If both orders occur, for example, if some demonstratives precede and some follow, or there is a free choice, then code 3 for GB025 or GB025a and GB25b 1. 
	
## Examples

**Angaataha** (ISO 639-3: agm, Glottolog: anga1290)

Coded 1. The demonstrative *kɨmandɨ* precedes the noun *utɨpɨhandɨ* (Eko & Graham 2014: 14–16).
```
kɨmandɨ utɨpɨhandɨ pwɨpwɨhɨtɨhande
this    book       thin
‘this thin book’ (Eko & Graham 2014: 14)
```

## Further reading

Dryer, Matthew S. 2013. [Order of demonstrative and noun](https://wals.info/chapter/88). In Matthew S. Dryer & Martin Haspelmath (eds), *The world atlas of language structures online*. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

## References

Eko, Robert & Mack Graham. 2014. *Tentative grammar description for the Angaataha language.* Ms.

## Related Features
* [GB024 What is the order of numeral and noun in the NP?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB024)
* [GB193 What is the order of adnominal property word and noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB193)

## Patron
Jay Latarche and Jeremy Collins
