## Are there definite or specific articles?

## Summary
An article is a marker that accompanies the noun and expresses notions such as (non-)specificity and (in)definiteness. Sometimes these notions of specificity and definiteness are summed up in the term 'identifiability'. The formal expression is irrelevant; articles can be free, bound, or marked by suprasegmental markers such as tone.
Articles are different from demonstratives in that demonstratives occur in a paradigm of markers that have a clear spatial deictic function. As demonstratives can grammaticalize into definite or specific articles, they form a natural continuum, making it hard to define discrete categories, but to qualify as an article a marker should be used in some cases to express definiteness without also expressing a spatial deictic meaning.


## Procedure
1. Code 1 if there is a morpheme that can mark definiteness or specificity without also conveying a spatial deictic meaning.
2. Code 0 if the source does not mention a definite article and you cannot find one in examples or texts in an otherwise comprehensive grammar.
3. Code ? if the grammar does not contain enough analysis to determine whether there is a definite article or not.
4. If you have coded 1 for GB020 and 0 for GB021 and GB022, please write a comment explaining the position of the definite or specific article. 
5. 




## Examples
 
**Aiton** (ISO 639-3: aio, Glottolog: aito1238)

Coded 1. The definite article is postnominal (Morey 2005:244-245).
```
mə    nan    a māt     nɛ   wā
time  that   minister  DEF  say 
‘Then the minister said.’
```

**Buwal**  (ISO 639-3: bhs, Glottolog: buwa1243)

Coded 1 (Viljoen 2013: 234–242).
```
Ma     ŋga     tekeɗ     anta    vayay ?
mā     ŋgā     tēkēɗ     āntā    vájáj
REL    break   calabash  DEF     who
‘Who broke the calabash?’  
```

**Ganda** (ISO 639-3:lug, Glottolog: gand1255) 

Coded 1. In Ganda, the definite article only occurs with adnominal numerals lower than 5. If a noun is not modified by a numeral lower than five, definiteness is not marked (Crabtree 1902: 149).

```
a. entebe	e-biri
   chair	DEF-two
   ‘the two chairs’

b. entebe	biri
   chair	two
   ‘two chairs’
```

## Further reading

Dryer, Matthew S. 2013. [Definite articles](http://wals.info/chapter/37). In Matthew S. Dryer & Martin Haspelmath (eds), *The world atlas of language structures online*. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

## References

Crabtree, William A. 1902. *Elements of Luganda grammar*. London: Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge.

Morey, Stephen. 2005. *The Tai languages of Assam*. (Pacific Linguistics, 565.) Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.

Viljoen, Melanie Helen. 2013. *A grammatical description of the Buwal language*. Melbourne: LaTrobe University. (Doctoral dissertation.)

## Related Features
* [GB021 Do indefinite nominals commonly have indefinite articles?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB021)
* [GB022 Are there prenominal articles?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB022)
* [GB023 Are there postnominal articles?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB023)

## Patron
Jay Latarche and Jeremy Collins
