## Do adnominal demonstratives show a visible-nonvisible distinction?

## Summary
Is there a distinction visible vs. non-visible when referencing to items that are the same relative distance? It is not relevant that adnominal demonstratives denoting far away reference often also imply non-visibility.

## Procedure
1. Find 'demonstratives', which are modifiers that can modify nouns (of any type and not just a restricted set such as location nouns) to mark position.
2. Code 1 if there are adnominal demonstratives that specifically communicate that something is invisible/visible to the speaker or interlocutor, rather than just near or far distance.

## Examples

**Southern Dong** (ISO 639-3: kmc, Glottolog: sout2741) 

Yang and Edmondson (2008: 521). Coded 1.

```
nai      this  (able to touch)
tca      that  (visible but far away)
ja       that  (invisible)
```

**Wunambal** (ISO 639-3: wub, Glottolog: wuna1249) 

McGregor (2004: 126). Coded 0:

The demonstratives are: 'this', 'that' and 'that way over there, usually out of sight'. 

## Further reading
Diessel, Holger. 2013. [Distance contrasts in demonstratives](https://wals.info/chapter/41). In Matthew S. Dryer & Martin Haspelmath (eds), *The world atlas of language structures online*. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

## References

McGregor, William B. 2004. *The languages of the Kimberley, Western Australia*. London: Routledge.

Yang, Tongyin & Jerold A. Edmondson. 2008. Kam. In Anthony V. N. Diller, Jerold A. Edmondson & Yongxian Luo (eds.), *The Tai-Kadai languages*, 509–584. London: Routledge.

## Related Features

* [GB036 Do demonstratives show an elevation distinction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB036)
* [GB037 Do demonstratives show a visible-nonvisible distinction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB037)

## Patron
Jay Latarche and Jeremy Collins
