## Is there a noun class/gender system where shape is a factor in class assignment?

## Summary
A noun class/gender system categorizes nouns for the purposes of grammatical [agreement](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Agreement) with other constituents in the noun phrase or other inflectional morphology. See the [classification wiki page](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Noun-Classes-and-Classifiers) for more information on our definition of noun class/gender. Noun class/gender assignment may be based on one or several factors. This feature focuses on whether the shape of an object is one of these factors for a given language. There must be a clear preference for certain nouns to be classified to certain gender categories as a result of their _shape_ for this feature to be coded 1. That is, shape must be one relevant factor in the assignment of gender; however it does not need to be an absolute deciding factor or the only relevant factor in gender/class assignment. 

Note that noun class markers are sometimes used to mark diminutives and augmentatives; this feature focuses specifically on shape (e.g. long, round, square, wide) and should _not_ be coded 1 if noun class markers associated with some other semantic categories (e.g. masculine and feminine) are recruited for diminutive and augmentative forms unless there is some other clear shape-based assignment.

## Procedure
1. If there is [a system of nominal classification](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Noun-Classes-and-Classifiers) where some markers vary based on the category of the noun,
2. And if these markers are **not** used only with numerals, demonstratives, and possessors (or some subset of these categories),
3. And if these markers are involved in [agreement](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Agreement) within the noun phrase, inflectional marking of the noun, or [indexing](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Indexing-vs.-pronouns),
4. And if there is a correlation between use of a particular gender marker and the shape of the referent, then code 1.
5. Code 0 if there is no class/gender system or the assignment of nouns to classes/genders does not involve shape.
6. Code 0 if noun class/gender markers associated with some other semantic categories (e.g. masculine and feminine) are used to create diminutive and augmentative forms that may have meanings of endearment or intensity in addition to size, but no other shape meanings are relevant to categorization of nouns.
7. If you are unsure whether the semantic properties associated with membership in a particular noun class or gender are specifically related to shape, code ? and provide a comment describing the semantic properties/categories in question.
			

## Examples

**Alamblak** (ISO 639-3: amp, Glottolog: alam1246)

The Alamblak noun class system has two categories: masculine and feminine. For referents whose gender/sex is obvious and culturally important, assignment is based on those semantic notions. For other referents the use of noun class markers with particular nominal roots is based largely on shape.

"These noun roots select one gender marker or the other as their semantically unmarked form on the basis of a secondary or extended meaning of the gender markers. Specifically, the masculine suffix (-r) may be used to refer to tall, or long, slender, or narrow objects; the feminine suffix (-t) may be used for typically short, squat, or wide objects" (Bruce 1984: 97).

Alambak is coded 1 because this extension of masculine and feminine categories involves specific semantic categories based on the shape of the referent (long, tall, slender vs. short, squat wide).


**Savosavo** (ISO 639-3: svs, Glottolog: savo1255)

Nouns associated with inanimate referents are typically categorized as masculine. However, they can be used with feminine noun class/gender markers to create a diminutive meaning (e.g. to indicate a contrast in size relative to the prototypical size of the referent). In the example below, the feminine object marker _k-_ is used to mark agreement with _molo_ 'knife', which would normally be associated with masculine agreement marking. This indicates a diminutive meaning.

```
Pade gnari molo  pono=lo        te   k-au-i.
one  small knife only=3SG.M.NOM EMPH 3SG.F.O-take-FIN
‘He only took one small knife.’ (bd cs tonelo 184)
```
(Wegener 2012: 63)

Savosavo is coded 0, as this does not involve the shape of the object playing a role in the lexical assignment of nominals to genders/classes, but rather involves the recruitment of a noun class/gender marker to express a diminutive meaning.

## Further reading

Corbett, Greville G. 1991. *Gender*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Senft, Gunter. 2000. *Systems of nominal classification*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

## References

Bruce, Les. 1984. *The Alamblak Language of Papua New Guinea (East Sepik)*. (Pacific Linguistics: Series C, 81.) Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.

Wegener, Claudia U. 2012. *A grammar of Savosavo*. (Mouton Grammar Library, 61.) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

## Related Features
* [GB051 Is there a noun class/gender system where masculine and feminine categories are a factor in class assignment?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB051)
* [GB053 Is there a noun class/gender system where animacy is a factor in class assignment?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB053)
* [GB054 Is there a noun class/gender system where plant status is a factor in class assignment?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB054)
* [GB192 Is there a noun class/gender system where a noun's phonological properties are a factor in class assignment?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB192)
* [GB321 Is there a large class of nouns whose noun class/gender is not phonologically or semantically predictable?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB321)
* [GB030 Is there a gender distinction in phonologically independent third person pronouns?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB030)
* [GB196 Is there a masculine/feminine distinction in phonologically independent second person pronouns?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB196)
* [GB197 Is there a masculine/feminine distinction in phonologically independent first person pronouns?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB197)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
