## Are there verb-adjunct (aka light-verb) constructions?

## Summary

A light-verb construction is a lexicalized complex predicate with two components: (1) a lexical stem which is not an inflected verb and (2) an inflectable verb, which is called the light verb. It is form-identical with a main verb, but used with a different meaning such that it ‘cannot be said to be predicating fully' (examples in English include _give a sigh_ or _take a plunge_) (Butt 2003).

Items that can occur as lexical stems in light-verb constructions are: (1) nouns (e.g. *do baby* in Ivorian English or *have sex* in English for ‘to copulate’), (2) adjectives (e.g. *make beautiful* in English), (3) non-inflectable items such as ideophones (e.g. *do ssss* for ‘to make an ssss sound’), or (4) verbs borrowed from other languages that do not inflect in the target language. 

Regular verbs cannot occur as lexical stems in light-verb constructions, in the Grambank definition. This makes light verb constructions different from serial verb constructions and verbal compounding, which involve a sequence of more than one verb. Another difference is that there is a predicate-argument relationship between the light verb and the other lexical stem (e.g. in *do baby*, *baby* is the object of *do*), while in serial verb constructions the verbs do not have a predicate-argument relationship between them since they instead describe a sequence of events. 

## Procedure
1. Code 1 if verbs with a general meaning may combine with a non-verbal element to produce new verbal predicates. If this is not explicitly mentioned in the grammar's chapter on verbs, check example sentences or word lists. 
2. Code 0 if you do not find examples of new verbal predicates formed by a combination of a verb and a non-verbal element, or if all of these instances can be analyzed as serial verb constructions or verbal compounds.

## Examples
**Korafe-Yegha**  (ISO 639-3: kpr, Glottolog: kora1294)

In Korafe-Yegha, nouns frequently combine with a generic verb to form new predicates. The generic verbs include meanings such as ‘do’, ‘say’, ‘see’, ‘hit’, ‘spear’, ‘do again’, ‘hold’, ‘get’ (Farr 1999: 63–66). Korafe-Yegha is coded 1.

```
boare de        tattoo hit            ‘tattoo (someone)’
ambe de         sago hit              ‘process sago’
jinogu tam bu   swoon find            ‘swoon’
ata gae         foot spear            ‘spear/sting foot’
bairobo bu      choice of catch get   ‘get first pick of catch’
buri dighi      tether tie            ‘tether’
uvu mindi       liquid consume        ‘drink’
oka bambu       fish get              ‘catch fish’
```

**Mandarin Chinese** (ISO 693-3: cmn, Glottolog: mand1415)

Butt (2003: 9–10) describes one construction in Mandarin as a light verb which, however, is not a light verb construction by the definition in Grambank. It would instead be counted as an example of verb compounding ("lexicalized, often non-compositional, constructions which combine two or more verb stems" according to [GB122](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/GB122)). Languages where the only examples of potential light verb constructions are of this kind should be coded 0.

``` 
关掉 
guān  diào
close fall
‘to switch off (a light)’ (Butt 2003: 10)

关上
guān  shàng
close ascend
‘to close (a door)’ (Butt 2003: 10)
```

## Further reading

Anderson, Gregory D. 2011. [Auxiliary verb constructions (and other complex predicate types): A functional–constructional overview](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-818X.2011.00311.x). *Language and Linguistics Compass* 5. 795–828.

Butt, Miriam. 2003. [The light verb jungle: Still hacking away](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.111.4948). *Harvard Working Papers in Linguistics* 9. 1–49.

Seiss, Melanie. 2009. [On the difference between auxiliaries, serial verbs and light verbs](http://web.stanford.edu/group/cslipublications/cslipublications/LFG/14/papers/lfg09seiss.pdf). In Miriam Butt & Tracy Holloway King (eds), *Proceedings of the LFG09 Conference*, 501–519. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

## References

Anderson, Gregory D. 2011. [Auxiliary verb constructions (and other complex predicate types): A functional-constructional overview](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-818X.2011.00311.x). *Language and Linguistics Compass* 5. 795–828.

Butt, Miriam. 2003. [The light verb jungle](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.111.4948&rep=rep1&type=pdf). *Harvard Working Papers in Linguistics* 9. 1–49.

Farr, Cynthia J. M. 1999. *The interface between syntax and discourse in Korafe: A Papuan language of Papua New Guinea.* (Pacific Linguistics: Series C, 148.) Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.

## Related Features

* [GB118 Are there serial verb constructions?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB118)
* [GB122 Is verb compounding a regular process?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB122)

## Patron
Jay Latarche and Jeremy Collins
