## Are different posture verbs used obligatorily depending on an inanimate locatum's shape or position (e.g. ‘to lie’ vs. ‘to stand’)?

## Summary

In some languages, locative predication (‘X is at Y’) always requires the use of a posture verb (e.g. ‘X sits at Y’ vs. ‘X lies at Y’). The posture verb depends on the shape or the position of the item that is located. For example, a bottle may always ‘stand’ somewhere and a ball may always ‘lie’ somewhere.  In these languages, a speaker could not simply say that something ‘is’ somewhere. Some posture verbs that may occur in languages are verbs for sitting, standing, hanging and lying. Note that this feature does not concern morphological marking of position or shape, but the use of different verbs for this purpose. If the posture verbs are clearly dominant in frequency this is sufficient to count as obligatory for the purpose of this question, even if non-posture verb alternatives are grammatical.

## Procedure
1. Code 1 if verb roots (not verb morphology) which express location (such as *is* in *the book is on the table*) also encode the posture (‘lie’, ‘stand’, ‘sit’, ‘hang’, e.g. *the book lies on the table* meaning ‘the book is on the table’), and if there is no frequently used more general way of encoding location. This should be clear in a grammar's section on simple clauses, specifically where it discusses predication of location (‘X is at/in Y’).
2. Code 0 if expressions of location do not usually encode posture. A look at texts and examples should give you an idea of this.
3. Code ? if you cannot find clear examples of locational predication.

## Examples

**Meyah** (ISO 639-3: mej, Glottolog: meya1236)

In Meyah, different positional verbs are obligatorily used to predicate the existence and location of (a) humans, (b) animals, trees, corn stalks, and houses, and (c) snakes, ants, rocks, yams, water, rainbows. The position of humans is encoded with the verb *eker* ‘to sit’. Members of category (b), which includes animals and inanimate objects that have legs, are located with the verb *ot* ‘to stand’. Members of category (c), which have in common that they don't have any legs, are located with the verb *ah* ‘to lie’ (Gravelle 2004: 223). Meyah is coded 1.

```
(a) Humans sit:

Idu  bera en-eker   gu  mei
Idu  TOP  DUR-sit   in  water
‘Who is in the water?’ (Gravelle 2004: 224)

(b) Nonhuman leg-possessing entities stand:

Mega  mos  ongga  en-ot      gij  Iskuruk
tree  mos  REL	  DUR-stand  in   Iskuruk
‘The mos tree that is in Iskuruk village…’ (Gravelle 2004: 224)

(c) Legless entities lie:

Ineymes  en-ah        gu  monuh  Mandacan
Ineymes  DUR-lie.down at  place  Mandacan
‘Ineymes village is in the Mandacan area.’ (Gravelle 2004: 224)
```

**Standard Dutch** (ISO 639-3: nld, Glottolog: dutc1256)

In Standard Dutch, there is a composite generic verb *zich bevinden* which can be used to specify the location of an entity without indicating its posture. It is, however, rarely used in day-to-day speech, and usually either _staan_ ‘to stand’, as in (a), or *liggen* ‘to lie’, as in (b) is used when referring to something's location. The verb that is used depends on the shape and the position of the located item. Dutch gets a 1 for this feature.

```
(a) staan ‘to stand'
De   fles   staa-t      in  de   kamer   hier-naast.
DEF  bottle stand-3SG   in  DEF  room    here-beside 
‘The bottle is in the room next door.’ (Jakob Lesage, p.k.)

(b) liggen ‘to lie'
De   bal  lig-t   in   de   kamer   hier-naast.
DEF  ball lie-3SG in   DEF  room    here-beside 
‘The ball is in the room next door.’ (Jakob Lesage, p.k.)
```

**Hatam** (ISO 639-3: had, Glottolog: hata1243)

Hatam has a generic verb *jo* which can be used to refer to an entity's location without specifying the posture of that entity. There are also posture verbs, but they are not used obligatorily, or by default, in locative predication constructions. Notably, in the examples below, posture verbs are only used for animate entities. Hatam is coded 0.

Use of the generic verb _jo_:
```
Lampu   jo   gau     meja  (dip).
lamp    be   above   table top
‘The lamp is above the table.’ (Reesink 1999: 64)

Ni-mmeng   mui  jo  tai     biei.
3SG-leaf   dry  be  around  tree
‘There are dry leaves (directly) around the tree.’ (Reesink 1999: 64)

Srad    jo  ghai    dani.
book    be  around  me
‘The books are scattered around me.’ (Reesink 1999: 64)
```

Use of posture verbs:

```
No    gwam    ei    meja    behei.
he    sit     LOC   table   under
‘He is sitting under the table.’ (Reesink 1999: 62)

Ya     ei    biei   behei.
stand  LOC   tree   under
‘He is standing under a tree.’ (Reesink 1999: 62)

Minsien bong   ei   ig     ne-te      hi.
dog     lie    LOC  house  3SG-side   other
‘The dog is lying beside the house.’ (Reesink 1999: 63)
```

**English** (ISO 639-3: eng, Glottolog: stan1293)

English is like Hatam, in that location of inanimate entities is usually specified with *to be*, and not with a posture verb, although English also has posture verbs such as *lie*, *stand*, *sit* and *hang*. English is also coded 0.

## Further reading

Ameka, Felix & Stephen C. Levinson. 2007. [Introduction: The typology and semantics of locative predicates: Posturals, positionals, and other beasts](http://pubman.mpdl.mpg.de/pubman/item/escidoc:59551:3/component/escidoc:59552/Ameka_2007_introduction.pdf). *Linguistics*, 45(5–6), 847–871.

Newman, John. 2002. A cross-linguistic overview of the posture verbs "sit", "stand", and "lie". In John Newman (ed.), *The linguistics of sitting, standing, and lying*, 1–24. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

## References

Gravelle, Gilles. 2004. *The Meyah language of Papua.* Amsterdam: Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. (Doctoral dissertation.)

Reesink, Ger P. 1999. *A grammar of Hatam: Bird's Head Peninsula Irian Jaya.* (Pacific Linguistics: Series C, 146.) Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.

## Related Features

* [GB116 Do verbs classify the shape, size or consistency of absolutive arguments by means of incorporated nouns, verbal affixes or suppletive verb stems?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB116)

## Patron
Jakob Lesage