## Is a pragmatically unmarked constituent order verb-final for transitive clauses?

## Summary
This feature focuses on the relative order of the verb and its [core arguments](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Core-arguments-(S,-A-and-P)) in a transitive clause. Any constituents other than the core arguments (A, P) and the verb of a transitive clause should be ignored. All questions concerning order of constituents aim to capture the pragmatically unmarked order between full NP constituents (not pronouns). Do not consider ‘left or right-dislocation', accompanied by intonational signals or pragmatically marked constructions such as focus. If the verb phrase consists of several elements it is the lexical verb that counts. The position of auxiliaries/TAME marking elements can be ignored.

## Procedure
1. Find the order of core arguments in the language, either in the text of the grammar or in examples involving full NP core arguments.
2. Code 1 if the pragmatically unmarked constituent order is consistently SOV.
3. Code 1 if the pragmatically unmarked constituent order is consistently OSV.
4. Code 1 if the unmarked constituent order is free and the author states that there is a V-final constituent order for transitive clauses that is pragmatically unmarked.
5. Code 1 if the constituent order is described as free and there are examples of a pragmatically unmarked constituent order which is SOV or OSV.
6. Code 0 if the grammar states that the language has a fixed word order for transitive clauses that is not SOV or OSV.
7. Code 0 if the grammar states the language has free or flexible word order but any V-final constituent order is pragmatically marked.
8. Code 0 if the constituent order is V-final only in examples involving pragmatic marking (contrastive markers, inferential markers, topic change, foregrounding, etc.).
9. Code ? if the pragmatically unmarked constituent order(s) is not mentioned and cannot be determined by examining examples.

## Examples

**Mangarrayi** (ISO 639-3: mpc, Glottolog: mang1381)

Though Merlan (1989: 26) describes OVS word order as more common, OSV order can also be found in pragmatically marked clauses. This is shown in the example below.
```
0-ḍaway    ̣na-waŋgij 0-ḍad+ma-ñ
N.ABS-tail M.NOM-boy 3SG/3SG-finish-PST.PUNCT
‘The boy finished the tail.’ (Merlan 1989: 26)
```
Mangarrayi is coded 1.


**Nez Perce** (ISO 639-3: nez, Glottolog: nezp1238)

Word order in Nez Perce is very free. According to Crook (1999: 231–232) any of the logically possible orders of a transitive verb and its A and P arguments is permissible, as shown in the following example:
```
ˀáayàtom   páaqnˀìsaqa          qèiqíine
ˀáayat-um  pee-qnˀíi-see-qa     eqi.it-ne
Woman-ERG  3ON3-dig-INCMPL-PST  qeqiit-OBJ
‘The woman was digging the qeqiit (an edible root).’ (Crook 1999: 231)

Other available word orders:
ˀáayàtom  qèiqíine  páaqnˀìsaqa
  S          O          V

páaqnˀìsaqa  ˀáayàtom  qèiqíine
  V             S        O 

páaqnˀìsaqa  qèiqíine  ˀáayàtom
  V            O         S

qèiqíine  páaqnˀìsaqa  ˀáayàtom
  O         V            S

qèiqíine  ˀáayàtom  páaqnˀìsaqa
  O         S         V
```
Because the available word orders in pragmatically unmarked transitive clauses with full NP arguments include V-final orders, Nez Perce is coded 1.

**Central Khmer** (ISO 639-3: khm, Glottolog: cent1989)

Haiman (2011: 203) describes the "standard" word order of Central Khmer as SV(O). In unmarked transitive clauses with full nominal arguments verbs are therefore followed by objects, as in the example below.
```
krabej         kravi:  kba:l
water.buffalo  shake   head
‘The water buffalo shakes its head.’ (Haiman 2011: 203)
```
Central Khmer is coded 0.

## Further reading

Dryer, Matthew S. 1989. [Discourse-governed word order and word order typology](http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~dryer/DryerDiscGovernedWO.pdf). *Belgian Journal of Linguistics* 4. 69–90.

Dryer, Matthew S. 2007. Word order. In Timothy Shopen (ed.), *Clause structure, language typology and syntactic description, Vol. 1* (Second edition), 61–131. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Dryer, Matthew S. 2013. [Order of subject and verb](http://wals.info/chapter/82). In Matthew S. Dryer & Martin Haspelmath (eds), *The world atlas of language structures online*. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

Song, Jae Jung. 2011. Word order typology. *The Oxford handbook of linguistic typology*, 253–279. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


## References

Crook, Harold David. 1999. *The phonology and morphology of Nez Perce stress*. Los Angeles: University of California. (Doctoral dissertation.)

Haiman, John. 2011. *Cambodian (Khmer)*. (London Oriental and African Language Library, 16.) Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Merlan, Francesca. 1989. *Mangarayi*. (Lingua Descriptive Studies, 4.) London: Routledge. 

## Related Features
* [GB130 What is the pragmatically unmarked order of S and V in intransitive clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB130)
* [GB131 Is a pragmatically unmarked constituent order verb-initial for transitive clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB131)
* [GB132 Is a pragmatically unmarked constituent order verb-medial for transitive clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB132)
* [GB134 Is the order of constituents the same in main and subordinate clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB134)
* [GB135 Do clausal objects usually occur in the same position as nominal objects?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB135)
* [GB136 Is the order of core argument (i.e. S, A and P) constituents fixed?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB136)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
