## Are causatives formed by affixes or clitics on verbs?

## Summary

A causative is a valency increasing operation that introduces a causer core argument that makes a non-subject argument do or become something (e.g. ‘x eats’ -> ‘y feeds x’ = ‘y causes x to to eat’). Note that both causatives adding an argument to a transitive clause (*I drink milk* -> *x causes me to drink milk*) and those adding an argument to an intransitive clause (*I sit* -> *x causes me to sit*) are targeted by this question. This question targets [productive](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Productivity), [phonologically bound](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Wordhood-and-phonological-boundness-or-independence) causative markers. Lexicalized causative verbs should be disregarded for this feature.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if a source mentions a phonologically bound morpheme that marks causatives.
2. Code 1 if there is no information on phonological (in)dependence but the relevant causative marker is orthographically bound to the verb. Add a comment that your analysis is based on orthography here.
3. Code 1 if you identify a phonologically bound causative marker in the examples/texts provided in a source.
4. Code 0 if a source mentions that there is no causative.  
5. Code 0 if a source mentions a periphrastic or phonologically independent causative construction, but not one marked with a bound marker.  
6. Code 0 if a grammar treats other valency changing operations in considerable depth but does not mention causative constructions.
7. Code ? if there are examples that contain a potential causative construction but their analysis remains inconclusive.  
8. Code ? if there are no sources treating valency changing operations in the language or if treatment of them is very limited.  

## Examples

**Ao Naga** (ISO 639-3: njo, Glottolog: aona1235)

Ao Naga (or Chungli Ao, in the source) has a causative suffix, *-taktsɨ*, which can transitivize intransitive sentences, as well as add an additional role to an already transitive clause. Ao Naga is coded 1 for this feature.

```
a. (Intransitive > transitive)
   ni-i   la      tʃip-taktsɨ
   1SG-A  3SG.F   cry-CAUS.PFV
   ‘I made her cry.’ (Escamilla 2012: 55)

b. (Transitive > ditransitive)
   pa-i      la-nem      mapa   injak-takstsɨ
   3SG.M-A   3SG.F-DAT   chore  do/work-CAUS.PFV
   ‘He made her do work.’ (Escamilla 2012: 55)
```

**Barain** (ISO 639-3: bva, Glottolog: bare1279)

Like other Chadic languages, Barain has fossilized remains of a system of intransitive-causative vowel alternation, which is no longer productive (Lovestrand 2012: 126–127). There is no other transitivizing morphology (although there is a passive, reflexive and reciprocal). Barain is coded as 0.

## Further reading

Escamilla, Ramón M. 2012. [*An updated typology of causative constructions: Form-function mappings in Hupa (California Athabaskan), Chungli Ao (Tibeto-Burman) and beyond*](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.453.9124&rep=rep1&type=pdf) (PhD Thesis). Berkeley: University of California. (Doctoral dissertation.)

Haspelmath, Martin & Thomas Müller-Bardey. 2004. [Valency change](http://www.eva.mpg.de/fileadmin/content_files/staff/haspelmt/pdf/2005val.pdf). In Geert E. Booij, Christian Lehmann, Joachim Mugdan & Stavros Skopeteas (eds), *Morphology: An international handbook on inflection and word-formation* (Vol. 2), 1130–1145. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

Zúñiga, Fernando & Seppo Kittilä. 2019. *Grammatical voice* (Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

## References

Escamilla, Ramón M. 2012. [*An updated typology of causative constructions: Form-function mappings in Hupa (California Athabaskan), Chungli Ao (Tibeto-Burman) and beyond*](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.453.9124&rep=rep1&type=pdf) (PhD Thesis). Berkeley: University of California. (Doctoral dissertation.)

Lovestrand, Joseph. 2012. *The linguistic structure of Baraïn (Chadic).* Dallas, TX: Graduate Institute of Applied Linguistics. (MA thesis.)

## Related Features

* [GB113 Are there verbal affixes or clitics that turn intransitive verbs into transitive ones?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB113)

* [GB156 Is there a causative construction involving an element that is unmistakably grammaticalized from a verb for ‘to say’?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB156)

## Patron
Jakob Lesage
