## Are nouns reduplicated?

## Summary

A noun is reduplicated if its root is fully or partially repeated. The word class of the outcome of the process is not relevant, as long as the root is a noun. Full repetition of already inflected nouns or units larger than a root does not trigger a 1 for this feature. This feature only targets [productive](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Productivity) reduplication. Reduplication in closed classes (e.g. kinship terms) is not relevant. Lexicalized examples are irrelevant.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if a source mentions productive reduplication of nouns.
2. Code 1 if you identify productively reduplicated nouns in a source.
3. Code 0 if a source mentions that there is no productive reduplication (of nouns).
4. Code 0 if a source discusses reduplication of verbs or other items but not of nouns.
5. Code 0 if the only instances of reduplicated nouns are lexicalized.
6. Code ? if there are examples that contain potential reduplicated nouns but their analysis remains inconclusive. 
7. Code ? if you suspect the author may have missed or disregarded reduplicated nouns.

## Examples

**Leti** (ISO 693-3: lti, Glottolog: leti1246)

In Leti, adjectives can be derived from nouns by means of reduplication (van Engelenhoven 2004: 101-102, 123). Leti is coded 1 for this feature.

```
üau ‘idiot, n.’   → üa-üau ‘idiot[ic], adj.’
lèpa ‘fool’       → lèplèpa ‘foolish’
mèla ‘night’      → mèl-mèla ‘by night, dark’
```

**Loup A** (ISO 693-3: xlo, Glottolog: loup1243)

In Loup A, there are some examples of reduplicated plural nouns corresponding to simplex singular nouns, but this reduplication process is not productive (Gustafson 2000: 48–49). Because there is no productive reduplication for nouns, this language is coded 0.
	
```
sankecem8 ‘good hunting dog’     -> sasanekecem8ek ‘good hunting dogs’
8ik8an ‘dull thing’              -> 8a8ik8aněs ‘dull things’
```

**Abu' Arapesh** (ISO 639-3: aah, Glottolog: abua1245)

In Abu' Arapesh, repetition and reduplication are only productive in child language (Nekitel 1985: 174). This language is coded 0.

**Yulu** (ISO 639-3: yul, Glottolog: yulu1243)

For Yulu, Santandrea (1970: 79) explicitly mentions that reduplication does not occur. This language is coded 0.

## Further reading

Gil, David. 2005. From repetition to reduplication in Riau Indonesian. In Bernhard Hurch (eds), *Studies on reduplication*, 31–64. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Hurch, Bernhard (ed.). 2005. *Studies on reduplication*. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Marantz, Alec. 1982. Re reduplication. *Linguistic Inquiry* 13. 435–482.

Moravcsik, Edith A. 1978. Reduplicative Constructions. In Joseph H. Greenberg, Charles Albert Ferguson & Edith A. Moravcsik (eds), *Universals of human language. Volume 3: Word structure*, 297–334. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Rubino, Carl. 2005. Reduplication: Form, function and distribution. In Bernhard Hurch (eds), *Studies on reduplication*, 11–29. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

## References

Gustafson, Holly S. 2000. *A grammar of the Nipmuck language*. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba. (MA thesis.)

Nekitel, Otto. 1985. *Sociolinguistic aspects of Abu', a Papuan Language of the Sepik Area, Papua New Guinea*. Canberra: Australian National University. (Doctoral dissertation.)

van Engelenhoven, Aone. 2004. *Leti: A language of Southwest Maluku.* (Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk instituut voor taal-, land- en volkenkunde, 211.) Leiden: Leiden: KITLV Press. 

## Related Features

* [GB158 Are verbs reduplicated?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB158)
* [GB160 Are elements apart from verbs or nouns reduplicated?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB160)

## Patron

Jakob Lesage

