## Are elements apart from verbs or nouns reduplicated?

## Summary

A lexeme is reduplicated if its root is fully or partially repeated. The word class of the outcome of the process is not relevant, as long as the root is not a noun or a verb. Reduplication of function words counts, as does reduplication of numerals, adjectives and adverbs. Full repetition of already inflected words or units larger than a root does not trigger a 1 for this feature. This feature only targets [productive](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Productivity) reduplication. Lexicalized examples are irrelevant. For open word classes, this means that reduplication should not be limited to a small set of lexically determined roots. For closed word classes, any transparent reduplication counts as long as the non-reduplicated root is also still used. Roots that only occur in their reduplicated form should be considered lexicalized reduplications.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if a source mentions productive reduplication of any word class that is different from verbs and nouns.
2. Code 1 if you identify productive reduplication of items that are not verbs or nouns in a source.
3. Code 0 if a source mentions that there is no productive reduplication of items beyond verbs and/or nouns.
4. Code 0 if a source discusses reduplication for nouns and/or verbs, but does not discuss reduplication for other items.
5. Code 0 if the only instances of reduplication beyond verbs and nouns in the language are lexicalized. For open word classes, this means that reduplication would only apply to a small set of lexically determined roots. For closed word classes, this means that the simplex root of a reduplicated item is no longer available as a separate word.
6. Code ? if there are examples that contain potential reduplication without verbal or nominal roots but their analysis remains inconclusive. 
7. Code ? if you suspect the author may have missed or disregarded reduplication of items beyond verbs and nouns in the language.

## Examples

**Leti** (ISO 693-3: lti, Glottolog: leti1246)

In Leti, reduplication derives adjectives from cardinal numerals (van Engelenhoven 2004: 101–102, 164). Leti is coded 1.

```
vòtelu ‘three’        → vò-te-telu ‘third’
sanunu ‘ten’          → sa-nu-nunu ‘tenth’
v(ï)èl-sia ‘ninety’   → v(ï)èl-si-sia ‘ninetieth’
```

**Nyam** (ISO 693-3: nmi, Glottolog: nyam1285)

In Nyam, demonstratives may be reduplicated to emphasize the particular referent that is singled out (Andreas 2012: 113-114). Nyam is coded 1.

```
a. lìbàŋ-éndɔ̀
   child-PROX
   ‘this child (here)’ 
			
b. lìbàŋ-énd~èndɔ̀
   child-PROX~PROX
   ‘this very child (here)’
				
c. lìbàŋ-énjì
   child-DIST1
   ‘that child (visible)’

d. lìbàŋ-énj~ènjì
   child-DIST1~DIST1
   ‘that very child (visible)’
```

**Nubi** (ISO 693-3: kcn, Glottolog: nubi1253)

In Nubi, reduplication of adjectives indicates intensity (Wellens 2003: 82). Nubi is coded 1.

```
'Sika    'de   'kan    ba'tal-ba'tal.
Road(s)  DEF   be-ANT  bad-REDUP
‘The roads were very bad.’ (Wellens 2003: 82)
```

**Lozi** (ISO 639-3: loz, Glottolog: lozi1239)

Lozi does not have productive reduplication and is coded 0. Reduplicated ideophones occur, but the corresponding non-reduplicated forms do not occur, so this reduplication process is historical rather than synchronically productive. See Fortune (2001: 103).

```
cupwa cupwa     ‘walking in water’
nga nga nga     ‘shivering’
nyame nyame     ‘disappearing’
pululu          ‘being grey in colour’
temu temu       ‘looking round speechless’
```

**Abu' Arapesh** (ISO 639-3: aah, Glottolog: abua1245)

In Abu' Arapesh, repetition and reduplication is only productive in child language (Nekitel 1985: 174). Abu' Arapesh is coded 0.
	
**Yulu** (ISO 639-3: yul, Glottolog: yulu1243)

For Yulu, Santandrea (1970: 79) explicitly mentions that reduplication does not occur. Yulu is coded 0.

## Further reading

Gil, David. 2005. From repetition to reduplication in Riau Indonesian. In Bernhard Hurch (eds), *Studies on reduplication*, 31–64. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Hurch, Bernhard (ed.). 2005. *Studies on reduplication*. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Marantz, Alec. 1982. Re reduplication. *Linguistic Inquiry* 13. 435–482.

Moravcsik, Edith A. 1978. Reduplicative Constructions. In Joseph H. Greenberg, Charles Albert Ferguson & Edith A. Moravcsik (eds), *Universals of human language. Volume 3: Word structure*, 297–334. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Rubino, Carl. 2005. Reduplication: Form, function and distribution. In Bernhard Hurch (eds), *Studies on reduplication*, 11–29. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

## References

Andreas, Heike. 2012. *Grammatische Beschreibung des Nyam- eine westtschadische Minoritätensprache.* Frankfurt am Main: Goethe University Frankfurt. (Doctoral dissertation.)

Fortune, George. 2001. *An outline of Silozi grammar*. Lusaka, Zambia: Bookworld Publishers.

Nekitel, Otto. 1985. *Sociolinguistic aspects of Abu', a Papuan Language of the Sepik Area, Papua New Guinea*. Canberra: Australian National University. (Doctoral dissertation.)

Santandrea, Stefano. 1970. *Brief grammar outlines of the Yulu and Kara Languages (Bahr el Ghazal, Sudan- Central African Republic).* (Museum Combonianum, 25.) Rome: Sodality of St. Peter Claver.

van Engelenhoven, Aone. 2004. *Leti: A language of Southwest Maluku.* (Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk instituut voor taal-, land- en volkenkunde, 211.) Leiden: KITLV Press. 

Wellens, Inneke. 2003. *The Nubi language of Uganda: An Arabic creole in Africa.* Nijmegen: Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen. (Doctoral dissertation.)

## Related Features

* [GB158 Are verbs reduplicated?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB158)
* [GB159 Are nouns reduplicated?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB159)

## Patron
Jakob Lesage

