## Can an adnominal property word agree with the noun in number?

## Summary
Adnominal property words semantically roughly correspond to adjectives in languages that have a separate adjective class. They can agree in number with the head noun even if the head noun is not overtly marked for number. Additionally, some languages exhibit a relativized form of the adnominal property word, which also expresses agreement with the noun it modifies. This construction is included within the scope of this feature.

## Procedure

1.  Code 1 if at least some adnominal property words, including those in their relativized forms, overtly agree with the number of the head noun they modify.
2.  Code 0 if the author states that there is no agreement, or if there is no evidence of this in the data. This applies to both regular and relativized forms.

## Examples

**Yeri** (ISO 639-3: yev, Glottolog: yapu1240)

Coded 1 (Wilson 2017: 129–132). Adjectives show plural agreement with their head noun, even if the head noun does not have a plural marker.

```
neigal  sɨpekɨ-i   yot-u-i       ∅-o           tapo.
cuscus  little-PL  DEM-MDIST-PL  3pl-stay.REAL tree.hole
‘Those small cuscuses live in the hole of the tree.’ 
```

**Barambu** (ISO 639-3: brm, Glottolog: bara1361)

Coded 1. The plural prefix is occasionally attached to adjectives. Plurality may also be shown through reduplication.

```
ä-gú̹ɽú̹-gu̹ɽu̹      a-ŋguà
PL-short-REDUP   PL-tree
‘short trees’ (Tucker & Bryan 1966: 146)
```

**Kenga** (ISO 639-3: kyq, Glottolog: keng1240)

Coded 1. In Kenga, the plural clitic can attach to the end of the noun phrase, so also to the adjective (Vandame 1968: 18–21).

## Further reading

Corbett, Greville G. 2000. *Number*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

## References

Tucker, Archibald N. & Margaret A. Bryan. 1966. *Linguistic analyses: The Non-Bantu languages of North-Eastern Africa*. (Handbook of African Languages.) London: Oxford University Press.

Vandame, Charles. 1968. *Grammaire Kenga*. (Études Linguistiques, 2.) Paris: Afrique et Language.

Wilson, Jennifer. 2017. *A grammar of Yeri: A Torricelli language of Papua New Guinea*. Buffalo: State University of New York. (Doctoral dissertation.)

## Related Features

* [GB185 Can an adnominal demonstrative agree with the noun in number?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB185)
* [GB186 Can an article agree with the noun in number?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB186)
## Patron
Jay Latarche and Jeremy Collins
