## Is there any productive augmentative marking on the noun (exclude marking by system of nominal classification only)?

## Summary
Augmentative marking generally intensifies the noun (in various ways). To code 1, the marker needs to minimally encode a large size of the noun it is attached to. This needs to be a [productive](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Productivity) pattern.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if there is a morpheme which is phonologically bound to nouns and which denotes a large version of the noun it is attached to.
2. Code 0 if augmentatives are only expressed by a shift of gender/noun class and consider [GB314](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB314).
3. Code 0 if the author states there are no augmentative markers or if there is extensive evidence of their absence. 
4. Code ? if there is not enough evidence. 

## Examples

**Hixkaryana** (ISO 639-3: hix, Glottolog: hixk1239) 

Coded 1. There is a phonologically bound augmentative marker on the noun marking larger size (Derbyshire 1979:83-4).

```
toto-ymo
person-AUG
‘the big man’
```

**Tehuelche** (ISO 639-3: teh, Glottolog: tehu1242) 

Coded 0. Augmentative marking is not observed, neither in grammatical sections, nor in sample texts (Fernández Garay 2004:9-29).


## Further reading

Dahl, Östen. 2006. Diminutives and augmentatives. In Keith Brown (ed.), *Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics*, 594–595. Second edition. Oxford: Elsevier.

Shepardson, Kenneth N. 1982. [An integrated analysis of Swahili augmentative-diminutives](https://journals.linguisticsociety.org/elanguage/sal/article/download/1111/1111-2256-1-PB.pdf). *Studies in African linguistics*, 13(1). 53–76.

## References

Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1979. *Hixkaryana*. (Lingua Descriptive Studies, 1.) Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Fernández Garay, Ana. 2004. *Diccionario Tehuelche-Español / índice Español-Tehuelche.* (Indigenous Languages of Latin America, 4.) Leiden: CNWS Publications.

## Related Features

* [GB187 Is there any productive diminutive marking on the noun (exclude marking by system of nominal classification only)?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB187)
* [GB314 Can augmentative meaning be expressed productively by a shift of gender/noun class?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB314)
* [GB315 Can diminutive meaning be expressed productively by a shift of gender/noun class?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB315)

## Patron
Jay Latarche and Jeremy Collins
