## Is there a non-bound comparative degree marker modifying the property word in a comparative construction?

## Summary
This feature focuses on the presence of a [phonologically free](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Wordhood-and-phonological-boundness-or-independence) marker of comparative degree that modifies the property word in a comparative construction (e.g. French ***plus** grand*). We specifically focus on comparative constructions where the standard of comparison is overtly expressed (e.g. meanings like ‘Maria is taller than John’) but also count clearly comparative forms where the standard of comparison is null/implied/inferred from the context (e.g. meanings like ‘Maria is taller’). The comparative constructions of interest express superiority (as in the French and English examples above), not inferiority (e.g. meanings like ‘John is less athletic than Maria’).

This feature requires that the degree marker modify the property word. It should not be phonologically bound.

## Procedure
1. If there is a degree marker expressing superiority in a comparative construction that modifies the property word and is not phonologically bound, code 1.
2. If there is a degree marker expressing superiority in comparative constructions, but any such markers are bound to the property word, code 0.
3. If the only phonologically free degree markers in the language expresses something other than superiority (e.g. inferiority), code 0.
3. If there is no degree marker in comparative constructions, code 0.

## Examples
**Miskito** (ISO 639-3: miq, Glottolog: misk1235)

A comparative construction expressing superiority in Miskito uses the phonologically independent property word/degree marker *kau*.

```
gul  ba  kau  mana      sa  aian wal  
gold the SUPL expensive is  iron than  
‘Gold is more expensive than iron.’ (CIDCA 1985: 80)
```

Miskito is coded 1 because the degree marker used in this comparative construction satisfies both the phonological independence and superiority meaning criteria. This language uses other degree markers for comparisons of inferiority, but those do not impact the coding of this feature.

## Further reading

Stassen, Leon. 1984. The comparative compared. *Journal of Semantics* 3. 143–182.

Stassen, Leon. 1985. *Comparison and Universal Grammar*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Ultan, Russell. 1972. [Some features of basic comparative constructions](http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED105718.pdf). *Working Papers on Language Universals* 9. 117–162.

## References

CIDCA. 1985. *Miskitu Bila Aisanka: Gramática Miskita.* (Serie Lingüística: Colección Autónoma.) Managua: Centro de Investigaciones y Documentación de la Costa Atláantica.

## Related Features
* [GB265 Is there a comparative construction that includes a form that elsewhere means ‘surpass, exceed’?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB265)
* [GB266 Is there a comparative construction that employs a marker of the standard which elsewhere has a locational meaning?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB266)
* [GB270 Can comparatives be expressed using two conjoined clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB270)
* [GB273 Is there a comparative construction with a standard marker that elsewhere has neither a locational meaning nor a ‘surpass/exceed’ meaning?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB273)
* [GB275 Is there a bound comparative degree marker on the property word in a comparative construction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB275)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
