## Is there a comparative construction with a standard marker that elsewhere has neither a locational meaning nor a ‘surpass/exceed’ meaning?

## Summary
This question is focused on comparative constructions that have a dedicated marker for the standard of comparison that does not fall under the umbrella of the locational comparative ([GB266](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/GB266)) or surpass/exceed comparative ([GB265](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/GB265)). Note that a language may have multiple comparative constructions, including a non-locational, non-surpass/exceed comparative as well as constructions that are described by those features.

Crucially, the dedicated marker in this construction must not elsewhere have a surpass/exceed meaning or a locational meaning. It may, however, have other functions (e.g. temporal adverb, conjunction, etc.). It is irrelevant whether this marker is [phonologically free or not](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Wordhood-and-phonological-boundness-or-independence) or whether it triggers [agreement](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Agreement) in case, noun class, etc. 

Historically, comparative constructions with dedicated markers (sometimes called ‘particle comparatives’) grammaticalize from constructions of conjoined clauses. An example of a particle comparative would be the Germanic languages, such as English *than*. Note that any marking of the property word is not relevant here (e.g. English *tall-er*).

## Procedure
1. If the language has a comparative construction with a dedicated marker of the standard of comparison that does not elsewhere have a surpass/exceed meaning or a locational meaning, code 1.
2. If the language has comparative constructions with dedicated markers, but only constructions with markers that elsewhere have surpass/exceed or locational meanings, code 0.
3. If the language has no comparative constructions with dedicated markers to identify the standard of comparison, code 0.

## Examples
**Gilbertese** (ISO 639-3: gil, Glottolog: gilb1244)

Gilbertese forms comparative constructions using the form *nakon*, which means ‘than’ and does not have a more general locational or surpass/exceed meaning.

```
e  rietaata riki te  nii            nakon te  kaina 
it tall     more ART cococnut.tree  than  ART pandanus.tree
‘The coconut tree is taller than the pandanus tree.’  
(Groves et al. 1985: 69; glosses partly derived from Bingham 1908)
```

Gilbertese is coded as 1 because the form that marks the standard of comparison in this example has neither a locational meaning nor a surpass exceed meaning. The fact that this marker is used in at least some comparatives is sufficient to trigger a 1 for this feature, regardless of whether there are other comparative constructions that employ markers with locational or surpass/exceed meanings (as it happens, there is no evidence for these other types of comparative markers in Gilbertese).

## Further reading

Stassen, Leon. 1984. The comparative compared. *Journal of Semantics* 3. 143–182.

Stassen, Leon. 1985. *Comparison and Universal Grammar*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Ultan, Russell. 1972. [Some features of basic comparative constructions](http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED105718.pdf). *Working Papers on Language Universals* 9. 117–162.

## References

Bingham, Hiram. 1908. *Gilbertese-English dictionary*. Cambridge, MA: The University Press.

Groves, Terab’ata R., Gordon W. Groves & Roderick Jacobs. 1985. *Kiribatese: An outline description.* (Pacific Linguistics: Series D, 64.) Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.

## Related Features
* [GB265 Is there a comparative construction that includes a form that elsewhere means ‘surpass, exceed’?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB265)
* [GB266 Is there a comparative construction that employs a marker of the standard which elsewhere has a locational meaning?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB266)
* [GB270 Can comparatives be expressed using two conjoined clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB270)
* [GB275 Is there a bound comparative degree marker on the property word in a comparative construction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB275)
* [GB276 Is there a non-bound comparative degree marker modifying the property word in a comparative construction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB276)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
