## Is there a bound comparative degree marker on the property word in a comparative construction?

## Summary
This feature focuses on the presence of a bound marker of comparative degree on the property word in a comparative construction (e.g. *-er* in English *tall-er*). We specifically focus on comparative constructions where the standard of comparison is overtly expressed (e.g. *Maria is taller than John.*) but also count clearly comparative forms where the standard of comparison is null/implied/inferred from context (e.g. *Maria is taller.*) This feature requires the degree marker to be [phonologically bound](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Wordhood-and-phonological-boundness-or-independence) to the property word.

## Procedure
1. If there is a degree marker that is bound to the property word in a comparative construction, code 1.
2. If there is a degree marker in comparative constructions, but it is not bound to the property word, code 0.
3. If there is no degree marker in comparative constructions, code 0.

## Examples
**Achumawi** (ISO 639-3: acv, Glottolog: achu1247)

Achumawi forms a comparative by suffixing *-wáqtsè* or *-máqtsè* to a property word.

```
wà'wá-máqtsè  qà   town  Alturas-ú-wádé  
big-CMPR      the  town  Alturas-of-at  
‘This is a bigger town than Alturas.’ (de Angulo & Freeland 1930: 86)
```

Because this degree marker is bound to the property word in an Achumawi comparative construction, the language is coded 1.

## Further reading

Stassen, Leon. 1984. The comparative compared. *Journal of Semantics* 3. 143–182.

Stassen, Leon. 1985. *Comparison and Universal Grammar*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Ultan, Russell. 1972. [Some features of basic comparative constructions](http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED105718.pdf). *Working Papers on Language Universals* 9. 117–162.

## References

de Angulo, Jaime & Freeland, Lucy S. 1930. The Achumawi language. *International Journal of American Linguistics* 6. 77–120.

## Related Features
* [GB265 Is there a comparative construction that includes a form that elsewhere means ‘surpass, exceed’?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB265)
* [GB266 Is there a comparative construction that employs a marker of the standard which elsewhere has a locational meaning?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB266)
* [GB270 Can comparatives be expressed using two conjoined clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB270)
* [GB273 Is there a comparative construction with a standard marker that elsewhere has neither a locational meaning nor a ‘surpass/exceed’ meaning?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB273)
* [GB276 Is there a non-bound comparative degree marker modifying the property word in a comparative construction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB276)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
