## Can comparatives be expressed using two conjoined clauses?

## Summary
Is there a comparative construction comprised of two conjoined clauses? Specifically, this construction must involve two conjoined clauses, one containing the standard of comparison and one containing the object of comparison, with no additional, obligatory, special markers of comparison (e.g. English *than*, or *surpass/exceed*). The NPs expressing the standard and object of comparison typically have the same function in the clauses. Note that many languages can juxtapose clauses (e.g. English *She is nice and he is not nice.*), however these sorts of constructions should only be considered for this feature when they are a dedicated way of expressing comparative meaning (e.g. when the structure clearly has a meaning like, ‘She is nicer than he is.’). In other words, we are focused on languages that have a dedicated comparative construction involving conjoined clauses.

## Procedure
1. If the language has a dedicated comparative construction that involves two conjoined clauses, with the NPs expressing the standard and object of comparison functioning similarly in separate clauses, code 1.
2. If the language can conjoin clauses in which an object of comparison and the standard of comparison function in similar roles, but this is not a dedicated comparative construction, code 0.
3. If the language cannot express comparison through the use of two conjoined clauses as described above, code 0.

## Examples

**Nukna** (ISO 639-3: klt, Glottolog: nukn1238)

Comparison in Nukna is not expressed with comparative words like English *more* or *bigger*. Instead, juxtaposition of clauses can be used. Nukna is coded 1.
```
Siang=ku   mulangán  sim       hang  Supsungan=ku   enanggon
Siang=TOP  far.away  somewhat  and   Supsungan=TOP  nearby
‘Siang is farther away than Supasungan.’ (Taylor 2015: 240)
```

**Lowland Tarahumara** (ISO 639-3: tac, Glottolog: lowl1265)

Comparatives can be formed by juxtaposing two clauses in Lowland Tarahumara. Lowland Tarahumara is coded 1.
```
migéli wé   a'lá rió hú húlio ta'mé 'la  rió hú  
Miguel very good man be Julio NEG   good man be  
‘Miguel is a better man than Julio.’ (Burgess 1984: 98)
```

**Hano** (ISO 639-3: lml, Glottolog: hano1246)

In Hano comparative statements of quality, property, or action of NPs are expressed through juxtaposed clauses, without any overt comparative markers. Hano is coded 1.
```
Jason n̄ava Turi vweluwele
Jason tall Turi short
‘Jason is tall, Turi is short.; OR: Jason is taller than Turi.’ (Vari-Bogiri 2011: 142)

La  vanua,  vol-vol mamara, Vila vol-vol marahi
LOC village buy-buy light,  Vila buy-buy heavy
‘It is cheap in the village, it is expensive in Vila.; 
OR: It is cheaper in the village than in Vila.’ (Vari-Bogiri 2011: 142)
```

## Further reading

Stassen, Leon. 1984. The comparative compared. *Journal of Semantics* 3. 143–182.

Stassen, Leon. 1985. *Comparison and Universal Grammar*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Ultan, Russell. 1972. [Some features of basic comparative constructions](http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED105718.pdf). *Working Papers on Language Universals* 9. 117–162.

## References

Burgess, Donald H. 1984. Western Tarahumara. In Ronald W. Langacker (ed.), *Studies in Uto-Aztecan grammar 4: Southern Uto-Aztecan grammatical sketches*, 1–149. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics and the University of Texas at Arlington.

Taylor, Matthew A. 2015. *Nukna grammar sketch*. (Data Papers on Papua New Guinea Languages, 61.) Ukarumpa: Summer Institute of Linguistics.

Vari-Bogiri, Hannah. 2011. *Phonology and morpho-syntax of Raga, Vanuatu*. Port Vila: University of the South Pacific. (Doctoral dissertation.)

## Related Features
* [GB265 Is there a comparative construction that includes a form that elsewhere means ‘surpass, exceed’?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB265)
* [GB266 Is there a comparative construction that employs a marker of the standard which elsewhere has a locational meaning?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB266)
* [GB273 Is there a comparative construction with a standard marker that elsewhere has neither a locational meaning nor a ‘surpass/exceed’ meaning?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB273)
* [GB275 Is there a bound comparative degree marker on the property word in a comparative construction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB275)
* [GB276 Is there a non-bound comparative degree marker modifying the property word in a comparative construction?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB276)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie