## Is there an inclusory construction?

## Summary
We are looking for a construction where a nonsingular referent is expressed by a nonsingular form (superset) and a singular form (subset). The element expressing the superset could be either [a free pronoun, an index](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Indexing-vs.-pronouns) or a plural noun/proper noun. 
An example: in ***We Harald** talked* ‘Harald and I talked.’, the free 1PL pronoun *we* is a superset, and included within that is the subset which is the 1SG referent (the ‘I’ in the translation) and the proper noun *Harald*. In some languages, this construction may involve associative duals and plurals. This feature includes implicit inclusory constructions (as seen above) and explicit inclusory constructions which may have an overt inclusory marker in the construction to further mark the inclusory construction. The subset can be expressed with different word classes such as proper nouns, numerals, demonstratives, etc. Inclusory constructions often take the form of nominal coordination constructions.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if coordination can be denoted by a non-singular superset (free or bound) and a singular form (a noun, or various word classes) that is being included in the larger group.
2. Code 1 if there are inclusory constructions which are marked by comitative markers. 
4. Code 1 if there is a non-singular full noun inclusory form rather than a pronoun, and mention this in the comments. 
5. Code ? if you are unable to determine from the grammar or example data whether there is an inclusory construction.
6. Code 0 only if within a very extensive grammar the author does not discuss inclusory constructions and if it can be determined absent from a large set of example data.

## Examples

**Nanggu** (ISO 639-3: ngr, Glottolog: nang1262) 

Coded 1. In Nanggu the comitative marker marks the included participant: it "indicates a co-actor to the agent expressed by the verb." The comitative "occurs with free augmented pronouns or verbs that express augmented number of the subject." The comitative below takes a third person minimal marker (Vaa 2013: 210–214).

```
Nege     pa-ngolopli-ti-gâ                          ma-e       matu.
today    IPFV:N3AUG.S/A:CAUS-decorate-TR-1AUG.S/A   with-3MIN  house
‘Today, we two decorate the house.’ (Vaa 2013: 211)
```

**Marghi Central** (ISO 639-3: mrt, Glottolog: marg1265)

Coded 1. Haspelmath (2007) gives the following example as the first and only language (at the time of writing) he has found which does not use a non-singular pronoun as the inclusory superset, but a non-singular proper noun marked with an associative plural form.

```
a. kàmbə̀ràwázhá-yàr  àgá  màlà  gə́ndà
   Kamburawazha-APL  with wife  of.him
   ‘Kamburawazha and his wife’ (Hoffmann 1963: 57)
```

Central Marghi also has the more widely found inclusory construction with a non-singular inclusory pronoun marking the superset.
```
b. nà'y àgá  Mádù 
   we   with Madu
   ‘Madu and I’ (Hoffmann 1963: 238)
```

**Tamasheq** (ISO 639-3: taq, Glottolog: tama1365)

Coded 0. The author calls the plural agreement marker *næɤ* in the following example an "inclusory pronominal clitic", but the nominal subset exhausts the potential referents and does not count as an inclusory construction. The nonsingular form (superset) is *-næɤ* ‘us’, and the singular forms (subset) are *nækk ə̀d kæyy* ‘me and you’ (Heath 2005: 702–705).
```
i-nhæ̀y-\ɑ-næɤ               [nækk  ə̀d   kæyy]
3SG.M-see.PFV.AFF-\O-1PL     1Sg   with 2.M.SG
‘He saw us, me and you.’ (Heath 2005: 703)
```
## Further reading

Haspelmath, Martin. 2007. Coordination. In Timothy Shopen (ed.), *Language typology and syntactic description*, 1–51. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Singer, Ruth. 2001. *The inclusory construction in Australian languages*. Melbourne: The University of Melbourne. (Honours Thesis.)

## References

Haspelmath, Martin. 2007. Coordination. In Timothy Shopen (ed.), *Language typology and syntactic description*, 1–51. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Heath, Jeffrey. 2005. *A grammar of Tamashek (Tuareg of Mali)*. (Mouton Grammar Library, 35.) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Hoffmann, Carl. 1963. *A grammar of the Margi language*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Vaa, Anders. 2013. *A grammar of Engdewu: An Oceanic language of Solomon Islands*. Oslo: University of Oslo. (Doctoral dissertation.)

## Related Features

* [GB027 Are nominal conjunction and comitative expressed by different elements?](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/GB027)
* [GB046 Is there an associative plural marker for nouns?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB046)

## Patron
Jay Latarche and Jeremy Collins
