## Can the agent be expressed overtly in a passive clause?

## Summary
Passivization is a detransitivizing operation that takes a transitive clause (*The dog bites the man.*) and turns it into an intransitive clause by promoting the [P](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Core-arguments-(S,-A-and-P)) argument (*the man*) to morphosyntactic [S](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Core-arguments-(S,-A-and-P)) function. In the resulting intransitive clause, the former [A](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Core-arguments-(S,-A-and-P)) argument (*the dog*) either vanishes or adopts an oblique function: *The man is bitten (by the dog).* ‘Mediopassives’, ‘anticausatives’ and the sort (e.g. *x breaks the vase* > *the vase breaks*) also count as passives. For languages with multiple passive constructions (e.g. ‘personal’ and ‘impersonal’ passives), this question should be answered 1 if the agent can be overtly expressed in any of these types of passive clauses. If the agent is overtly expressed, it may be unmarked or it may be marked in a number of ways: by case marking or adpositions, word order, etc.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if you find an example of a passive clause that has an overtly expressed agent.
2. Code 0 if a grammar explicitly states that agents cannot be overtly expressed in passive clauses.
3. Code 0 if a grammar contains a lot of examples of passive clauses, but no examples where there’s an overtly expressed agent.
4. Code 0 if the language does not have a morphosyntactic passive (expressed by means of word order, particles, auxiliaries, affixes, clitics).
5. Code ? if it is unclear whether the language has a morphosyntactic passive.
6. Code ? if you do not have enough data to say that it is impossible to express an agent in a passive clause (e.g. because it is not mentioned or because there are not many examples of passive clauses in the grammar).

## Examples

**Zuni** (ISO 639-3: zun, Glottolog: zuni1245)

Zuni does not allow the addition of an agent role to a passive clause (Nichols 1997: 126) and is coded 0.

```
a. hom       nicikya     'uk-na-'kya
   1SG.ACC   ring        give-PASS-PST
   ‘I was given a ring.’ (Nichols 1997: 126)

b. *tom       'an   hom       nicikya     'uk-na-'kya
   2SG.ACC    P     1SG.ACC   ring        give-PASS-PST
   ‘I was given a ring by you.’ (Nichols 1997: 126)

c. *tom      'akkya     hom       nicikya   'uk-na-'kya
   2SG.ACC   with       1SG.ACC   ring      give-PASS-PST
   ‘I was given a ring by you.’ (Nichols 1997: 126)
```

**Liko** (ISO 639-3: lik, Glottolog: lika1243)

De Wit (2015: 374–375) describes a neutro-passive construction in Liko, which appears to be a passive construction that does not allow an overtly expressed agent. Because the agent cannot be expressed, he argues that this construction is not a true passive. Elsewhere, he concludes that there is no passive in Liko (De Wit 2015: 410–414). The neutro-passive *does* qualify as a passive for the purpose of Grambank, however, and the fact that the agent cannot occur with the neutro-passive triggers a 0 for this feature.

Some examples of the neutro-passive derivation, with *-ɩ́k* in Liko:

```
ká-nʊw-á ‘to tear’     → ká-nʊw-ɩ́k-á ‘to tear, intransitive’
kó-ɓún-ó ‘to break’    → kó-ɓún-ík-ó ‘to break, intransitive’
```

**Raji** (ISO 639-3: rji, Glottolog: raji1240)

Raji has a passive suffix, *-i*. Passive constructions allow the expression of the agent marked with ablative case (Khatri 2008: 27). Raji is coded 1 for this feature.

```
a. ram-ɦatiŋ     bʌtaŋ    dza–i–k-a
   Ram-ABL       rice     eat-PASS-SD-PST
   ‘Rice was eaten by Ram.’ (Khatri 2008: 27)

b. ram-ɦatiŋ     bʰwa    sʌtika
   Ram-ABL       bird    kill-PASS-SD-PST
   ‘The bird was killed by Ram.’ (Khatri 2008: 27)
```

## Further reading

Haspelmath, Martin. 1990. The grammaticization of passive morphology. *Studies in Language*, 14(1). 25–72.

Keenan, Edward L. & Matthew S. Dryer. 2007. [Passive in the world’s languages](http://linguistics.ucla.edu/people/keenan/Papers/KeenanDryerPassiveProofs.pdf). In Timothy Shopen (ed.), *Language typology and syntactic description, volume I: Clause structure* (Second Edition), 325–361. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Siewierska, Anna. 2013. [Passive constructions](http://wals.info/chapter/107). In Matthew S. Dryer & Martin Haspelmath (eds), *The world atlas of language structures online*. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

Zúñiga, Fernando & Seppo Kittilä. 2019. *Grammatical voice.* (Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

## References

de Wit, Gerrit. 2015. *Liko phonology and grammar: A Bantu language of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.* Leiden: Leiden University. (Doctoral dissertation.)

Khatri, Ramesh. 2008. *The structure of verbs and sentences of Raji*. Kirtipur: Tribhuvan University. (MA thesis.)

Nichols, Lynn. 1997. *Topics in Zuni syntax*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. (Doctoral dissertation.)

## Related Features

* [GB147 Is there a morphological passive marked on the lexical verb?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB147)
* [GB302 Is there a phonologically free passive marker (‘particle’ or ‘auxiliary’)?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB302)

## Patron
Jakob Lesage
