## Is there a phonologically independent reciprocal marker that does not consist of two quantifiers (e.g. each + other; two + two)?

## Summary

Reciprocal markers indicate that an action or feeling is mutual across two or more parties (e.g. *they love each other*; *they beat each other*). This feature targets [phonologically independent](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Wordhood-and-phonological-boundness-or-independence) reciprocal markers that do *not* consist of two quantifiers. Such markers may be described as pronouns, particles or auxiliaries. They may be composite, as long as they do not consist of two quantifiers. A reciprocal marker may indicate both reflexive and reciprocal functions. It needs to be [productive](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Productivity), not limited to a small set of verbs that are probably lexicalized.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if there is at least one phonologically independent reciprocal marker in the language that is not synchronically recognizable as composed of two quantifiers.
2. Code 0 if there are no phonologically independent (non-bipartite) reciprocal markers in the language.
3. Code 0 if a grammar discusses reciprocal markers, reflexive markers, or bound reciprocal markers, but does not mention or contain an example of a reciprocal marker that does not consist of two quantifiers. Write ‘not mentioned’ as a comment.
4. Code 0 if reciprocal markers are not mentioned in an otherwise comprehensive grammar of the language.
5. Code ? if you do not have enough information to know whether a reciprocal marker can be analyzed as consisting of two quantifiers or not.

## Examples

**Kosraean** (ISO 639-3: kos, Glottolog: kosr1238)

Kosraean features a complex reciprocal marker, *sie sin sie*, literally translatable as ‘one of one’ (Lee 1975: 107). As such, it qualifies as a bipartite reciprocal marker and does not trigger a 1 for this feature. It is coded 0.

```
a. Eltahl   luhngse    sie    sin   sie.
   they     like       one    of    one
   ‘They like each other.’ (Lee 1975: 107)

b. Kuht    etuh    sie     sin    sie.
   we      know    one     of     one
   ‘We know each other.’ (Lee 1975: 107)
```

**Western Farsi** (ISO 639-3: pes, Glottolog: west2369)

Western Farsi features both a bipartite reciprocal marker, *ye ... digar* (or *yak ... digar*) and a non-bipartite one, *ham*, which also means ‘same’ in other parts of the grammar (Windfuhr & Perry 2009: 437). The latter triggers a 1 for this feature.

```
a. yek-i     pas     az    digar-i
   one-INDF  after   from  other-INDF
   ‘one after another’ (Windfuhr & Perry 2009: 437)

b. az       ham         jodā      šod-and|
   from     each.other  separated become.PST-3PL
   ‘They parted. (lit. 'They became separate from each other.')’ (Windfuhr & Perry 2009: 437)
```

**Bargam** (ISO 639-3: mlp, Glottolog: barg1252)

Bargam has an independent non-bipartite marker, *an*, that fulfills both reciprocal and reflexive functions (Hepner 2006: 100). It is coded 1 for this feature.

```
a. on    in     an          tu-bulon       yaʔ-ay
   women they   each.other  PFV-speak.to   PST.IPFV-N1
   ‘The women were speaking to each other.’ (Hepner 2006: 100)

b. I    kab        an          huser-01-uʔ      ha(ʔ)-01-w.
   we   this-DAT   each.other  divide-JUSS-1PL  QUOT-PST-1PL
   ‘Let’s divide up (ourselves) here.’ (Hepner 2006: 100)
```

## Further reading

Evans, Nicholas. 2008. Reciprocal constructions: Towards a structural typology. In Ekkehard König & Volker Gast (eds), *Reciprocals and reflexives: Theoretical and typological explorations*, 33–104. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Geniušienė, Emma S. 1987. *The typology of reflexives*. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

König, Ekkehard & Volker Gast. 2008. Reciprocity and reflexivity: Description, typology, and theory. In Ekkehard König & Volker Gast (eds), *Reciprocals and reflexives: Theoretical and typological explorations*, 1–31. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Nedjalkov, Vladimir P. 2007. Overview of the research: Definitions of terms, framework, and related issues. In Vladimir P. Nedjalkov (ed.), *Reciprocal constructions*, 3–114. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 

Nedjalkov, Vladimir P. (ed.) 2007. *Reciprocal constructions*.Amsterdam: John Benjamins. (This five-volume collection includes chapters on 39 genealogically and areally diverse languages.)

## References

Hepner, Mark. 2006. *Bargam grammar sketch.* Papua New Guinea: The Summer Institute of Linguistics. (Manuscript.)

Lee, Kee-Dong. 1975. *Kusaiean reference grammar.* (Pali Language Texts Micronesia.) Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Windfuhr, Gernot & John R. Perry. 2009. Persian and Tajik. In Gernot Windfuhr (ed.), *The Iranian languages*, 416–544. London: Routledge.

## Related Features

* [GB114 Is there a phonologically bound reflexive marker on the verb?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB114)
* [GB115 Is there a phonologically bound reciprocal marker on the verb?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB115)
* [GB305 Is there a phonologically independent reflexive marker?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB305)

## Patron
Jakob Lesage
