## Is there a count/mass distinction in interrogative quantifiers?

## Summary
When interrogatives are used to question quantity, are different interrogative forms used to quantify count nouns and mass nouns? For example, English contrasts *how many* for count nouns (as in, *how many apples?*) and *how much* for mass nouns (as in, *how much sand?*). Languages that have at least one form that means either ‘how much' (of a mass noun) or ‘how many' (of a count noun), but not the alternative, are considered to have a count/mass distinction in interrogative quantifiers. Languages in which any interrogative quantifiers can be used interchangeably with both count and mass nouns do not have the relevant distinction.

## Procedure

1. Identify the interrogative forms that can be used to quantify nominals (as in English *how much* or *how many*).
2. If the form used to express the meaning ‘how much' (of a mass noun) is different from the form used to express ‘how many' (of a count noun), code 1.
2. If the form(s) used to express the meaning ‘how much' (of a mass noun) can also be used to express the meaning ‘how many' (of a count noun), and vice-versa, code 0.
4. If there are multiple forms used to express the meanings ‘how much’ and/or ‘how many’, and at least one form is restricted to meaning either ‘how much’ (of a mass noun) or ‘how many’ (of a count noun) to the exclusion of the alternative, code 1.
5. If a single interrogative quantifier is discussed, which is glossed as ‘how much/many’, but examples with both count and mass nouns are not provided, code 0.
6. If one or both of the meanings ‘how much’ (of a mass noun) and ‘how many’ (of a count noun) is not mentioned or included in glossing and there are insufficient examples to identify interrogative quantifiers for both count and mass nouns, code ? and provide a comment.

## Examples

**Woods Cree** (ISO 639-3: cwd, Glottolog: wood1236)

Woods Cree has separate content question words for the meanings ‘how much’ and ‘how many’ that are used with mass and count nouns respectively.
```
tâniδikoh(k)
tân+iδikohk
Q+so.far/long
‘how much’ (Starks 1992: 165)

tântahto
tân+tahto
Q+many
‘how many’ (Starks 1992: 165)
```
Woods Cree is coded 1.

**Maricopa** (ISO 639-3: mrc, Glottolog: mari1440)

A construction involving the verb *lyvii-k* and the interrogative prefix *ka-* is used in Maricopa to express both the meaning ‘how many’ (of a count noun) and ‘how much’ (of a mass noun).
```
m-naw-sh      ka-lyvii-m    m-wii-m
2-friend-SBJ  Q-be.like-DS  2-do-Q.REAL
‘How many friends do you have?’ (Gordon 1986: 205)

shiyaal  ka-lyvii-m    m-wii-m
money    Q-be.like-DS  2-do-Q.REAL  
‘How much money do you have?’ (Gordon 1986: 205)
```
Maricopa is coded 0.

## Further reading

Gil, David. 1982. *Distributive numerals*. Los Angeles: University of California. (Doctoral dissertation.)

## References

Gordon, Lynn. 1986. *Maricopa morphology and syntax*. (University of California Publications in Linguistics, 108.) Berkeley: University of California Press.

Starks, Donna Joy. 1992. *Aspects of Woods Cree syntax*. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba. (Doctoral dissertation. 

## Related Features

* [GB324 Is there an interrogative verb for content interrogatives (who?, what?, etc.)?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB324)
* [GB326 Do (nominal) content interrogatives normally or frequently occur in situ?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB326)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
