## Can the relative clause precede the noun?

## Summary

Can non-correlative [relative clauses](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Relative-Clauses) immediately precede the noun they modify? In other words, are there relative clauses with the structure *[**[Who has a green hat]** the woman] is tall*? This question only concerns relative clauses that immediately precede the noun, without requiring an anaphoric pronoun in the main clause - which would make them correlative relative clauses (e.g. *I saw her [who has a green hat the woman]*) (see [GB330](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB330)). A relative clause is a type of clause that serves to modify a noun. Merely having a verb that modifies the noun does not suffice as evidence of a relative clause. In such cases, it is more likely to be identified as a participle.

## Procedure

1. Consider only non-correlative clauses: disregard relative clauses that have an anaphoric pronoun in the main clause.
2. Code 1 if a source mentions that relative clauses are or can be prenominal.
3. Code 1 if you find examples of prenominal relative clauses.
4. Code 0 if a source mentions that relative clauses cannot be prenominal.
5. Code 0 if a source describes postnominal or internally headed relative clauses but does not discuss prenominal relative clauses.
6. Code ? if there are examples that contain potential prenominal relative clauses but the analysis is inconclusive.
7. Code ? if the source does not treat relative clauses in much detail and may have missed prenominal relative clauses.

## Examples

**Awtuw** (ISO 639-3: kmn, Glottolog: awtu1239)

In Awtuw, relative clauses precede the noun (Feldman 1986: 164). Awtuw is coded 1 for this feature.

```
rey    yen    tawkway  da-kl-a-re       rame(-re-k) lakna-kay
3SG.M  2SG    tobacco  FACT-get-PST-O   man-O-INTS  die-PRF
‘the man you got tobacco from has died’ (Feldman 1986: 164)
```

**Umbu-Ungu** (ISO 639-3: ubu, Glottolog: umbu1258)

In Umbu-Ungu, relative clauses may either precede or follow the noun (Head 2011: 81). REL-NOUN is the dominant pattern (Head 2011: 2), but the fact that some relative clauses precede the noun is enough to trigger 1 for this feature.

Relative clause preceding the noun:

```
kalopera  naa   to-ru-mu//          kolea   aku-me     pali
frost     not   strike-DIST.PST-3SG place   REL-the.PL all
‘all those places the frost did not strike’ (Head 2011: 81)
```

Relative clause following the noun:

```
kapisi   koyo-ngi             aku-mu-nge     mare
cabbage  steam.cook-NPST.3PL  REL-the.SG-LOC some
‘some of the cabbage which they had steam cooked’ (Head 2011: 81)
```

**Neverver** (ISO 639-3: lgk, Glottolog: ling1265)

In Neverver, relative clauses are always postnominal, just like other nominal modifiers (Barbour 2012: 147). Neverver is coded 0 for this feature in Grambank.

```
Niterikh  an  im-ngar      nakh   i-tokh         si.
child     REL 3SG.IRR-cry  here   3SG.REAL-exist NEG
‘There is no child who is crying here.’ (Barbour 2012: 149)
```

## Further reading

See also the special section on the Grambank wiki on [relative clauses](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/Relative-Clauses).

Dryer, Matthew S. 2013. [Order of relative clause and noun.](http://wals.info/chapter/90) In Matthew S. Dryer & Martin Haspelmath (eds), *The world atlas of language structures online*. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

Lehmann, Christian. 1986. On the typology of relative clauses. *Linguistics* 24(4). 663–680.

## References

Barbour, Julie. 2012. *A grammar of Neverver.* (Mouton Grammar Library, 60.) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Feldman, Harry. 1986. *A grammar of Awtuw.* (Pacific Linguistics: Series B, 94.) Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.

Head, June. 2011. *A grammar of Umbu-Ungu.* Ukarumpa: Ms., SIL.

## Related Features

* [GB327 Can the relative clause follow the noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB327)
* [GB329 Are there internally-headed relative clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB329)
* [GB330 Are there correlative relative clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB330)
* [GB331 Are there non-adjacent relative clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB331)

## Patron

Jakob Lesage
