## Are there non-adjacent relative clauses?

## Summary
Is there a non-correlative [relative clause](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Relative-Clauses) that is not adjacent to its modified noun? For example, in ***[The woman]** is tall **[who has a green hat]***, the noun (*woman*) is not adjacent to its modifying relative clause (*who has a green hat*). It must be possible for the head noun to be any noun, not only an unspecific (pro)noun (e.g. *whoever*). Do not consider correlative relative clauses for this feature (see [GB330](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB330)). A relative clause is a type of clause that serves to modify a noun. Merely having a verb that modifies the noun does not suffice as evidence of a relative clause. In such cases, it is more likely to be identified as a participle.

## Procedure

1. Code 1 if a source mentions that there are non-adjacent relative clauses, or that relative clauses may be separated from their head noun by other constituents.
2. Code 1 if you find examples in the description of non-adjacent relative clauses.
3. Code 0 if a source mentions that there are only adjacent relative clauses, or that relative clauses may not be separated from their head noun by other constituents.
4. Code 0 if a source comprehensively describes relative clauses but does not discuss non-adjacent relative clauses.
5. Code ? if there are examples that contain potential non-adjacent relative clauses.
6. Code ? if the source does not treat relative clauses in much detail and may have missed non-adjacent relative clauses.

## Examples

**Ottawa** (ISO 639-3: otw, Glottolog: otta1242)

For Ottawa, Valentine (2001: 581–582) describes "non-contiguous relative clauses", where the relative clause is separated from its head noun. Ottawa is coded 1.

```
Mshkikwaaboo     gye   wgii-wzhitoonaawaa   waa-aabjitoowaad.
liquid.medicine  and   ANIM.PL-made:INANIM  REL-ANIM.PL:will.use:INANIM
‘They made liquid medicine that they were going to use.’ 
(literally: ‘Liquid medicine they made that they were going to use.’) (Valentine 2001: 582)
```

**Pendau** (ISO 639-3: ums, Glottolog: pend1242) 

For Pendau, Quick (2007: 508) explicitly mentions that relative clauses always immediately follow the argument that they modify. This implies that they cannot be separated from their head noun. Pendau is coded 0.

## Further reading

See also the special section on the Grambank wiki on [relative clauses](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/Relative-Clauses).

Dryer, Matthew S. 2013. [Order of Relative Clause and Noun.](http://wals.info/chapter/90) In: Dryer, Matthew S. & Haspelmath, Martin (eds.) _The World Atlas of Language Structures Online._ Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

Lehmann, Christian. 1986. On the typology of relative clauses. *Linguistics* 24(4). 663–680.

## References

Valentine, J. Randolph. 2001. *Nishnaabemwin reference grammar.* Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Quick, Phil. 2007. *A grammar of the Pendau language of central Sulawesi, Indonesia.* (Pacific Linguistics, 590.) Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University.

## Related Features

* [GB327 Can the relative clause follow the noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB327)
* [GB328 Can the relative clause precede the noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB328)
* [GB329 Are there internally-headed relative clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB329)
* [GB330 Are there correlative relative clauses?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB330)

## Patron
Jakob Lesage
