## Can adnominal possession be marked by a suffix on the possessed noun?

## Summary
This feature targets a specific type of adnominal possessive construction, namely one where possession is marked by a [suffix or enclitic](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Affixes-and-clitics) on the possessed noun. In some cases, the possessive suffix indexes agreement categories of the possessor. Crucially, the possession must be marked by a [phonologically bound](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Wordhood-and-phonological-boundness-or-independence) element that follows and is phonologically bound to the possessed noun.

## Procedure
1. Code 1 if there is an adnominal possessive construction marked by an element which is phonologically bound to the possessed noun, and which occurs to the right of that noun.
2. Code 0 if there is no adnominal possession construction in which a suffix or enclitic on the possessed noun marks possession.
3. Code 0 if the only relevant adnominal possession construction is marked only by tone, not by a suffix or enclitic.

## Examples

**Nganasan** (ISO 639-3: nio, Glottolog: ngan1291)

"The relationship between the modifier (the possessor) and the head (the possessed noun) is encoded by possessive suffixes on the head and/or a Genitive case suffix appearing on the possessor." (Wagner-Nagy 2014: 76)

```
a. (mənə) d’esɨ-mə
   (1SG)  father-1SG.POSS
   ‘my father’ (Wagner-Nagy 2014: 77)

b. (tənə) d’esɨ-tə             ban-tu
   (2SG)  father-GEN.2SG.POSS  dog-3SG.POSS
   ‘your father’s dog’ (Wagner-Nagy 2014: 77)

c. d’ed’i       ban-tu
   father.GEN   dog-3SG.POSS
   ‘father’s dog’ (Wagner-Nagy 2014: 77)
```

Nganasan would be coded 1 for this feature, because a common strategy for marking possession involves possessive suffixes on the possessed noun. It does not matter for this feature that when the possessor is specified with a noun or pronoun it must be in genitive case (but the availability of a strategy for marking possession on the possessor with a genitive suffix in this language would also trigger a 1 for [GB432](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/GB432)).

## Further reading

Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. & R. M. W. Dixon (eds). 2013. *Possession and ownership: A cross-linguistic typology*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Baron, Irène, Michael Herslund & Finn Sørensen (eds). 2001. *Dimensions of possession*. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

## References

Wagner-Nagy, Beáta. 2014. Possessive constructions in Nganasan. *Томский журнал лингвистических и антропологических исследований. Tomsk Journal of Linguistics and Anthropology* 1. 76–82.

## Related Features
* [GB065 What is the pragmatically unmarked order of adnominal possessor and possessed noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB065)
* [GB430 Can adnominal possession be marked by a prefix on the possessor?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB430)
* [GB431 Can adnominal possession be marked by a prefix on the possessed noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB431)
* [GB432 Can adnominal possession be marked by a suffix on the possessor?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB432)


## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
