## Can adnominal possession be marked by a suffix on the possessor?

## Summary
This feature targets a specific type of adnominal possessive construction, namely one where a possessor (either nominal or pronominal) is marked with a [suffix or enclitic](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Affixes-and-clitics) to indicate possession of an object. This frequently takes the form of a genitive suffix on a possessor, but may also involve other types of suffixes or enclitics. Crucially, the possession must be marked by an element that follows and is [phonologically bound](https://github.com/grambank/grambank/wiki/Wordhood-and-phonological-boundness-or-independence) to the possessor noun/pronoun.

## Procedure
1. Code 1 if there is an adnominal possessive construction marked by an element which is phonologically bound  to the possessor noun phrase or pronoun, and which follows that noun/pronoun.
2. Code 0 if there is no adnominal possession construction in which a suffix or enclitic on the possessor noun/pronoun functions to mark possession.
3. Code 0 if the only relevant adnominal possession construction is marked by tone alone, not by a suffix or enclitic.

## Examples

**Southeastern Pomo** (ISO 639-3: pom, Glottolog: sout2982)

Possession is marked by a suffix *-it* on the possessor, and in the case of alienable possession an additional suffix *-baq*, which indicates that the relationship between possessor and possessum is alienable. Southeastern Pomo would be coded 1.

```
a. hayut     xin
   hayu-it   xin
   dog-POSS  name
   ‘the dog's name’ (Moshinsky 1974: 95)

b. bṭedit      xal
   bṭed-it     xal
   woman-POSS  arm
   ‘the woman's arm’ (Moshinsky 1974: 95)

c. hayutbaq        ca
   hayu-it-baq     ca
   dog-POSS-ALIEN  house
   ‘the dog's house’ (Moshinsky 1974: 95)

d. Ɂuyitbaq        ca
   Ɂuyi-it-baq     ca
   3SG-POSS-ALIEN  house
   ‘his house’ (Moshinsky 1974: 95)
```

**Wappo** (ISO 639-3: wao, Glottolog: wapp1239)

Wappo expresses alienable possession by marking the possessor noun or pronoun with a genitive suffix.

``` 
a. me-meɁ   chipe  tu:nikuɁ
   2SG-GEN  red    dress
   ‘your red dress’ (Thompson et al. 2014: 9)

b. k'ew-meɁ  k'ešu
   man-GEN   meat
   ‘the man’s meat’ (Thompson et al. 2014: 14)
```

Wappo would be coded 1 because this genitive suffix marks possessive relationships and is phonologically bound to the right of the possessor noun.

## Further reading

Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. & R. M. W. Dixon (eds). 2013. *Possession and ownership: A cross-linguistic typology*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Baron, Irène, Michael Herslund & Finn Sørensen (eds). 2001. *Dimensions of possession*. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

## References

Moshinsky, Julius. 1974. *A grammar of Southeastern Pomo*. (University of California Publications in Linguistics, 72.) Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Thompson, Sandra A., Joseph Sung-Yul Park & Charles N. Li. 2014. *A reference grammar of Wappo*. (University of California Publications in Linguistics 138). Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

## Related Features
* [GB065 What is the pragmatically unmarked order of adnominal possessor and possessed noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB065)
* [GB430 Can adnominal possession be marked by a prefix on the possessor?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB430)
* [GB431 Can adnominal possession be marked by a prefix on the possessed noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB431)
* [GB433 Can adnominal possession be marked by a suffix on the possessed noun?](https://github.com/grambank/Grambank/wiki/GB433)

## Patron
Hannah J. Haynie
